South African private-sector regional airline Airlink announced on Monday that it was going to resume daily scheduled flights to Maseru, the capital of Lesotho, on March 29. This is the result of the mountain kingdom’s reopening of its borders. The country had imposed travel restrictions in an attempt to contain the Covid-19 pandemic. “After a disruption of several weeks, Airlink is looking forward to welcoming customers onto its flights that provide vital connections supporting trade, business, tourism and family ties between South Africa and the mountain kingdom,” affirmed company CEO Rodger Foster. However, travellers should check with the relevant Lesotho and South African authorities for the latest travel regulations. Initially, the airline will operate one flight each way. Flight 4Z 052 will leave Johannesburg at 09h35 and arrive in Maseru at 10h35. The return flight, 4Z 053, will depart from Maseru at 11h00 and reach Johannesburg at 12h05. As demand increases, Airlink will add more flights. The airline stressed that passengers on the Maseru-Johannesburg route would be able to “seamlessly” connect with Airlink’s other services across South and Southern Africa. It also highlighted that its economy class passengers had not only a 20 kg free checked-in baggage allowance, but also a 15 kg sporting equipment allowance. Business class passengers had a 30 kg free checked-in baggage allowance. Airlink also emphasised that the high efficiency particulate air filters fitted to its aircraft blocked 99.97% of any particulates in the cabin air, including any Covid-19 molecules. Further, none of its flights were fitted with middle seats. The airline has a fleet of more than 50 modern jet airliners and, in 2019, served more than 30 destinations in ten African countries and St Helena island (flights to St Helena currently remain suspended). According to Airports Company South Africa, Airlink was South Africa’s most punctual airline last year, and in January this year 98.79% of its flights left on time.