The representative body of the global airline industry, the International Air Transport Association (Iata), has reported that its latest opinion poll, conducted from a sample of recent travellers, showed that their confidence in the resumption of air travel was growing. They were also frustrated with current limitations on travel and accepted using a travel app that would manage their health credentials and allow them to travel. The sample comprised 4 700 online interviews carried out in 11 markets over the period February 15 to February 23. The respondents qualified for the survey if they had travelled by air during the previous 11 months. In terms of geographic breakdown, in Australia, Canada, France, Germany, India, the UK and the US the sample size was 500 each, while in Chile, Japan, Singapore and the United Arab Emirates it was 300 each. In terms of results, 88% of those polled affirmed that a balance had to be struck between managing the risks posed by the Covid-19 pandemic and reactivating the economy, and 85% were of the opinion that governments should set targets – such as Covid-19 testing capacity or vaccinations carried out – to allow the reopening of borders. Most (84%) believed that Covid-19 would not disappear but would have to be managed, but with life and travel returning to normal. No less than 68% said that travel restrictions had lessened their quality of life and 49% thought that air travel restrictions had been too severe. “The top priority of everybody at the moment is staying safe amid the Covid-19 crisis,” pointed out Iata director-general and CEO Alexandre de Juniac. “But it is important that we map a way to being able to reopen borders, manage risks and enable people to get on with their lives. That includes freedom to travel.” Other findings from the poll were that 57% of respondents now expected to travel within two months of Covid-19 being contained (an increase over the figure of 49% recorded last September) and 72% wanted to see family and friends as soon as they could (up from 63% in September). No fewer than 81% stated that being vaccinated would make it more likely that they would travel, but 84% affirmed that they would not travel if they faced being quarantined at their destination (effectively identical to the 83% figure for September). And 56% said they would postpone travel until after the economy stabilised (in September the proportion had been 65%). “It is becoming clear that we will need to learn to live and travel in a world that has Covid-19,” he said. “Given the health, social and economic costs of travel restrictions, airlines should be ready to reconnect the world as soon as governments are able to reopen borders. That’s why a plan with measurable milestones is so critical. Without one, how can we be prepared for restart without an unnecessary delay?” No less than 89% of those polled stated that governments should standardise test and vaccination certificates. The prospect of Iata’s Travel Pass app encouraged 80% (and the same number would use it), but 78% would not use a travel health credential app if they did not have full control over their data. “We are designing the Iata Travel Pass with the traveller in mind,” he assured. “Passengers keep all the data on their mobile devices, and they remain in full control of where the data goes. There is no central database. While we are making good progress with numerous trials, we are still awaiting the global standards for digital testing and vaccine certificates. Only with global standards and governments accepting them can we maximise efficiency and deliver an optimum travel experience.”