Transport equipment and engineering solutions provider Babcock International has added the latest DAF XF 480, XF 530 and CF 430 truck models to its transport portfolio. Transport solutions sales director Mark Gavin says the new models bring many improvements compared to older DAF trucks in Babcock’s portfolio, including smoother shifting, higher efficiency rear axles, new instrument panels, better fuel efficiency and new exterior styling. The new trucks bring with them “pure excellence”, meaning more uptime for the customer, improved total cost of ownership, improved safety and comfort, as well as a lower environmental impact and benefits for the driver. The XF and CF models are up to 10% more fuel efficient than prior models, have new powertrains and driver support systems and lower repair and maintenance rates. Gavin explains that the fuel savings are achieved through new MX-13 engines, new TraXon gearboxes, improved aerodynamics and climate control system, as well as improvements to the electric control unit software. Improvements to the engine include a change from a unit injection to common rail injection system, as well as fully variable pumps, new turbo chargers and enhanced engine break. The new XF and CF models have outputs ranging between 315 kW and 390 kW, and between 2 300 Nm and 2 600 Nm. The trucks have a load capacity of 56 t gross combination weight. Gavin notes that a multi-torque feature on the new trucks provides additional torque in the highest gear, enabling drivers to stay in the highest gear for as long as possible. This helps to keep revs as low as possible. Moreover, the trucks have a new chassis concept and a new frame design compared with older truck models. These new chassis have more space for maximum cooling capacity, optimised strength and weight, higher crash resistance for improved safety, higher stiffness combined with lower weight, and contain an electronically controlled Air Suspension system. Gavin says the driver can adjust the air suspension of the vehicle from outside the cab with the extended ECAS5 control, while updated driver assistance and safety on the trucks involves adaptive cruise control, predictive cruise control, forward collision warning, advanced emergency braking, lane departure warning, vehicle stability control and a Tincan Cab safety system. He explains that the Tincan passive safety system involves a mechanism that makes the cab move backwards by a certain distance, should the vehicle crash into an object. This reduces the impact on the driver and results in the shell of the cab remaining intact, thereby lowering repair costs. Gavin adds that the driver performance assistant on the new trucks provides smart feedback on the driver’s driving style, with detail on break wear and fuel consumption. The assistance gives a maximum score of 15 for good driving. The UK-headquartered Babcock International group operates in 21 countries. It has a 120-year operational record in South Africa. The group has been supplying DAF trucks since 2010. The DAF brand is owned by US-based Paccar Corporation. DAF has won a multitude of truck awards in Europe, including truck of the year in 2018. Babcock MD Marius Barnard says the company has about 160 existing customers that it supplies DAF products and services to, while it is targeting at least 150 prospective customers for the new trucks. He adds that Babcock has 11 service and repair dealers across South Africa, while it has a further 12 breakdown support and sales dealers. Babcock also offers its services on site where required. Babcock was set a target by DAF to sell 340 units by the end of the year, although the company is confident it can sell closer to 450, considering that the company already had 100 orders before the first trucks hit the shore. The trucks are priced at between R1.7-million and R2.1-million, depending on the model in the new ranges on offer, and is being shipped from DAF’s headquarters in Netherlands. Meanwhile, Babcock plans on opening a semi-knocked-down plant for local assembly. The company is targeting building the plant in KwaZulu-Natal for easier shipping. The investment for the plant will be between R30-million and R50-million and provide employment for between 20 and 30 more people.