Jaguar Land Rover says its Reimagine plan will see the electrification of both Land Rover and Jaguar brands on separate architectures with “two clear, unique personalities”. The British car maker says Land Rover will welcome six pure electric variants in the next five years. The first all-electric variant will arrive in 2024. By 2025, luxury car brand Jaguar is “set to emerge as a pure electric luxury brand” with a new portfolio of designs and next-generation technologies. By 2030, in addition to 100% of Jaguar sales, it is anticipated that around 60% of Land Rovers sold will be equipped with zero-tailpipe powertrains. Jaguar Land Rover says it aims to achieve net zero carbon emissions across its supply chain, products and operations by 2039. As part of this ambition, the company is also preparing for the expected adoption of clean fuel-cell power in line with a maturing hydrogen economy. Development is already underway, with prototypes arriving on UK roads within the next 12 months as part of a long-term investment programme. The company says yearly commitments of around £2.5-billion will include investments in electrification technologies and the development of connected services to enhance the  customer experience, alongside data-centric technologies that "should further improve the ownership ecosystem". Jaguar Land Rover has been a wholly-owned subsidiary of India’s Tata Motors, in which Tata Sons is the largest shareholder, since 2008. “As a human-centred company, we can, and will, move much faster and with clear purpose of not just reimagining modern luxury, but defining it for two distinct brands,” says Jaguar Land Rover CEO Thierry Bolloré. “Brands that present emotionally unique designs, pieces of art if you like, but all with connected technologies and responsible materials that collectively set new standards in ownership. We are reimagining a new modern luxury by design.” Jaguar Land Rover’s current model range includes fully electric, plug-in hybrid and mild-hybrid vehicles, as well as diesel and petrol engines. The company sold 425 974 vehicles in 127 countries in 2020. 