Rapid antigen testing for Covid-19 has been made mandatory and free for all guests and crew, prior to travelling on the luxury Blue Train, which is operated by State-owned Transnet. The rapid test complements a comprehensive set of precautionary measures administered for the safety and peace of mind of guests and crew. “As tourism businesses, we are motivated to keep up to date with the undulating waves of Covid-19 infections and their impact on our sector and country. “What we know for sure is that health and safety concerns continue to be a barrier for people wanting to travel, and yet, travel is one sure way of dealing with some of the challenges brought about by Covid-19 and the consequent lockdowns,” explains Transnet heritage, tourism and hospitality executive manager Nomasonto Ndlovu. “We believe that adding rapid antigen testing for Covid-19 waylays a lot of those concerns and gives our guests peace of mind when travelling on the Blue Train. After all, the best way to enjoy this national treasure is when one is free of anxieties and able to completely surrender to the experience,” she adds. The antigen rapid testing is conducted during the check-in process at the Blue Train’s VIP Lounges in Pretoria and Cape Town, at no additional cost to travellers. Administering the test is a qualified medical practitioner, and guests receive their results within an hour via text message or email notification. As such, guests need to factor in an additional hour for checking-in; this information is communicated to guests in the confirmation letter. Should guests’ results be positive for Covid-19, the reservations team will arrange for a postponement of their journey. “In addition to this testing, we maintain travelling with a certified health practitioner on board, quarantine suites and regular servicing of our air conditioning system for common areas and individual suites,” Ndlovu notes, adding that necessary adjustments will be made, as and when needed, to ensure that the Blue Train prevails as “the perfect escape from the freneticism of a Covid-riddled world, if only for a moment”. The Blue Train remains compliant with the national government’s pronouncements on mitigating the spread of Covid-19, which means that all guests continue to be required to wear face masks in common areas of the Blue Train, with the exception of their private suites.