The  Volvo XC40 Recharge Pure Electric – the first all-electric car from the Swedish luxury brand – will be available in South Africa in the second half of the year. The all-electric sport utility vehicle (SUV) has already demonstrated strong demand internationally. By the start of production at the company’s Ghent plant, in Belgium, on October 1 last year, every car scheduled to be built that calendar year had already been sold. Volvo Car South Africa MD Greg Maruszewski says the XC40 Recharge is capable of travelling more than 400 km on a single charge. “It can be charged to 80% of its battery capacity in as little as 40 minutes using a fast charger.” The XC40 Recharge has twin electric motors producing 304 kW (408 hp) of power and 660 Nm of torque to deliver a zero-to-100 km/h sprint time of 4.9 seconds. The lack of an internal combustion engine frees up space for an additional 30-litre storage compartment – or frunk – under the front bonnet, while the placement of the batteries under the centre of the car means that space is not compromised elsewhere. XC40 Recharge owners will be able to charge their vehicles at a dealership, at home or at one of the ever-growing network of public charging stations. Volvo Car South Africa says it is rolling out a network of charging stations at its dealerships and, by the end of this year, each Volvo dealership will have a charging station. The XC40 Recharge is the first of five fully electric cars to be launched by the Swedish company over the next five years. “Volvo Cars will launch a fully electric car every year, as we look to make all-electric cars 50% of global sales by 2025, with the rest hybrids,” notes Maruszewski. “Recharge will be the overarching name for all chargeable Volvos with a fully electric and plug-in hybrid powertrain. “By 2030, the company aims to only build electric cars.” Maruszewski believes that the XC40 Recharge will find favour in South Africa. “South Africans are already firm fans of the internal combustion-engine-powered XC40. It had an 8.40% share of its segment in 2019, [growing] to 14.7% in 2020. “We look forward to bringing the huge benefits of electric driving – and more – to an already award-winning package.” Volvo dealers will start taking orders for the XC40 Recharge in April. Deliveries will start in August. The price tag of the XC40 Recharge will be confirmed later this month.