The Social Housing Regulatory Authority (SHRA) and the South African Women in Construction & Built Environment (SAWIC & BE) have signed a memorandum of understanding (MoU) aimed at advancing the participation of women in the social housing sector. Various stakeholders and partners attended the signing ceremony, highlighting the importance of the initiative between SHRA and the SAWIC & BE, and discussing the overall value of women empowerment in South Africa. The key partners in attendance included the National Empowerment Fund (NEF), Women of South Africa (WOSA) and the Black Business Council (BBC). SHRA sector development and transformation specialist Dudu Phoswa notes in a statement that the aim of the MoU is to advance the transformation agenda within the social housing sector by empowering women to lead and manage accredited social housing institutions and other delivery agents. Further, they will be empowered to deliver strategically located quality homes as developers, contractors, suppliers and service providers. The outcomes of the MoU envisage practical implementation, which will be measured through a cooperation plan that outlines activities and timeframes. The MoU has five strategic areas of focus referred to as projects, and has already identified a yearly work plan for 2021/22. The objectives of the different projects range from supporting members that have already been accredited or have accredited projects, working with SAWIC & BE on the roll-out based on membership requirements, ongoing awareness sessions, establishing an online portal to facilitate trade between members and grant recipients, and the establishment of a task team to meet regularly and measure performance. SHRA chairperson Bathabile Dlamini notes that all sectors in the economy stand to benefit when women are an integral part of all activities as equals in the conceptualisation and implementation of economic activities. “It is pleasing that the work . . . is aligned with the United Nations Global Compact and United Nations Women’s seven principles of adoption for all organisations.” She emphasises that opening up the sector for women to participate means that the SHRA will have to simplify its application processes so that they do not become a barrier to entry. Dlamini also adds that the SHRA aims to “hand hold” each client through the processes and meet each one at the level they are at. NEF venture capital and corporate finance executive Hlengiwe Makhathini says the organisation remains committed to building South Africa “brick by brick” and that the NEF will remain a “refuge and bastion” for the economic empowerment of black women. “We are committed to taking this important agreement forward, through innovative funding of black women in construction, and across the value chain of the sector and its allied industries.” BBC VP Nkuli Bogopa states that the Ministry for Women and People Living with Disabilities is a key ministry in the Office of the Presidency through which the BBC can monitor and evaluate the performance of the other ministries. “The expectations that we have, through the programme we have established, is that there is no less than 40% representation of women across various establishments.” SAWIC & BE CEO Kile Mteto says that women continue to be marginalised in the built environment, particularly in the property sector. “My firm belief is that when women are supported and guided, they can take a country forward.” She also advocates for the formation and strengthening of relationships with stakeholder networks beyond the MoU, in light of inequality being prevalent across South Africa. WOSA spokesperson Dr Sibongile Vilakazi says partnerships are a significant driver in changing in the livelihoods of women. “We say that women remain at the tail end of any development. But through great efforts, as with this MoU, we will start seeing the results in changing the landscape of women empowerment. We hope this MoU, the partnerships, and the value chain created here today, are replicated across the economy.”