JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – The board of diversified mining company African Rainbow Minerals (ARM) has approved the Merensky reef project at the Two Rivers platinum group metals (PGMs) mine in Mpumalanga, ARM CEO Mike Schmidt said on Wednesday after the company reported record financial results. The Two Rivers Merensky project will produce an additional 182 000 six-element (6E) PGM ounces, 1 600 t of nickel and 1 300 t of copper a year, the company reported at a results presentation covered by Mining Weekly. (Also watch attached Creamer Media video.) Commissioning will take place in the second quarter of ARM’s 2023 financial year, with Two Rivers expected to be positioned at the bottom half of the PGM industry’s cash cost curve. The ARM-managed Two Rivers is a joint venture between ARM, at 51%, and Implats, at 49%. The operation is situated on the farm Dwarsrivier on the southern part of the eastern limb of the Bushveld Complex, some 35 km south-west of Burgersfort. The operation comprises two on-reef decline shafts and a concentrator plant and has a life-of-mine offtake agreement with Impala Refining Services. Ahead of it, in the third quarter of the company's 2022 financial year, the Two Rivers Plant (TRP) expansion will be commissioned, providing an additional 40 000 to 60 000 6E PGM ounces a year. The 2022 financial year will also see the commissioning of the new Modikwa Chrome Recovery Plant at the Modikwa PGMs mine, which lies along the border between the Mpumalanga and Limpopo provinces, around 15 km north-west of Burgersfort. In manganese, the Black Rock and Gloria projects, in the Northern Cape, will ramp up to four-million tonnes of manganese in financial year 2023. These growth projects were all displayed after the 25 000-employee JSE-listed ARM, headed by executive chairperson Dr Patrice Motsepe, reported 134%-higher headline earnings for the six months to December 31 of R5-billion, boosted by iron-ore and PGMs. Net cash on hand is up 29% to $4.8-billion.