Former Transnet chief executive Brian Molefe insisted before the commission of inquiry into state capture on Monday that he was not betrayed by the Guptas, and challenged those who felt that his relationship with the controversial family was wrong to present evidence of wrongdoing. Molefe was on Monday continuing his evidence before the commission, in a session that once again saw him explaining his relationship with the Guptas, who have been placed at the heart of allegations of the capture of state institutions by private entities. Molefe has admitted he crossed paths with the Gupta brothers long before he took the reins of the country's key state-owned institutions, Eskom and Transnet. Both companies awarded large-scale contracts to entities linked to the Guptas and their associates, and some of the transactions were concluded under Molefe's leadership. His relationship with the Guptas has become a blotch on his high-flying career in the public service, and forced his unceremonious exit from Eskom following then-public protector Thuli Madonsela's damning State of Capture report in 2016. Evidence leader Advocate Anton Myburgh asked Molefe on Monday if he ever feel betrayed by the Guptas, given the amount of evidence that has been heard by the commission so far implicating the business family, which he has admitted to knowing and being friendly with. "Do you feel that perhaps you were played by them?" he probed. Molefe responded saying he does not know whether he was played, adding: "But what I definitely feel is that there have been suggestions that I have done things that are wrong, but there has been no evidence to show what I did." He further elaborated: "I have no regrets that I knew the Guptas. I have no regrets that I have gone to their house, that I have spoken to them over the phone. I was not the only South African that did that." 'Betrayed' by Madonsela Myburgh pressed Molefe on whether he feels betrayed by the family. "I feel betrayed by the Public Protector," he said. He added that "the Guptas may have done what they did, but I was not part of it." Molefe has maintained that Madonsela's report, which details allegations of corruptions and claims of tender irregularities at Transnet, was concluded without offering him a right to respond to allegations levelled against him. Molefe, who had been seconded to Eskom at the time of the release of the report, quit his position as CEO of the power utility following the release of the report. "If eventually there is proof beyond reasonable doubt...  that there was wrongdoing, then I will feel betrayed." According to Molefe, "[t]he way we have approached this problem is that guilty has already been ascribed" before proper process has been undertaken. "There may well be evidence that they did wrong things, but the day that are arrested and found guilty in terms of the laws of our land, perhaps at that point, I will feel betrayed." Molefe, who was on Monday giving evidence relating to his time at Transnet, has already given testimony pertaining to Eskom, including the prepayments made by the power utility to the Gupta-owned Optimum Coal mine. In December 2015, Glencore entered into agreement to sell the mine to a company owned by the family, Tegeta Exploration and Resources, for R2.15-billion. Eskom made a R659-million prepayment to the company following the takeover. It later emerged that the funds were used to plug a R600-million shortfall that the company had for the R2.15-billion transaction. Molefe will continue his evidence on Tuesday.