Airlink, the South African private-sector regional airline, has announced that it has had to postpone the restart of its route between Johannesburg and Richards Bay until May 2. The route had been suspended in April last year due to the Covid-19 pandemic. As a consequence of the pandemic, economic activity in the town, which is the country's specialist coal export harbour, slowed significantly. This, in turn, resulted in weak demand for travel to the port. And as a result of that situation, Richards Bay Airport could not afford to provide necessary essential services for scheduled air operations. "It is a classic Catch 22 situation," pointed out Airlink MD and CEO Rodger Foster. "Historically there was strong demand on the route, enough to sustain up to three flights every day. However, the Level 3 Covid-19 restrictions have the consequence that only twenty percent of the usual number of people are allowed to be on site at the coal terminal, which is the industrial heart of Richards Bay. This has been a major factor slowing the town's industrial and economic tempo and epitomises the impact the lockdown typically has on the spectrum of Richards Bay businesses." "As a result, passenger demand has weakened," he added. "The Richards Bay airport management have advised us that in the present climate, the expense of providing the necessary fire and rescue emergency services required to accommodate scheduled airline services cannot be justified until demand picks up." The airline apologised to ticketholders inconvenienced by the continued suspension of the route. Holders of tickets for Richards Bay flights during February, March and April could request to be refunded or to be rebooked for flights at later dates. "We hope to resume services on the route in May, by which time we trust that the situation will have improved and the airport will once again be able to accommodate scheduled airline operations in compliance with the South African Civil Aviation Authority's safety requirements."