The UK, through the UK-South Africa Tech Hub, and in partnership with the Future Females Business School, will help 30 South African women entrepreneurs to develop and grow GreenTech businesses, the UK High Commission announced on Monday. In its statement, the High Commission stressed Britain's commitment to assisting South Africa to transition to a low carbon economy, in order to address the issue of climate change. The UK is the incoming president of the COP26 climate change summit, to be held later this year. The internationally agreed objective, embodied in the Paris Agreement (reached at COP21 in December 2015) is to limit global warming to less than two degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels. The UK seeks to help South Africa meet its Paris Agreement obligations in an accelerated and just manner. "A just transition is not just about Government policy and major infrastructure and energy projects," highlighted UK High Commissioner to South Africa Nigel Casey. "It is about inclusion and the creativity and drive of businesses to shape the economy and create the jobs of the future. I am therefore delighted that, through the UK-South Africa Tech Hub and the Future Females Business School, we are addressing both by supporting women entrepreneurs." "The Future Females Business School GreenTech Programme is a three-month virtual programme, equipping local female entrepreneurs with the entrepreneurial skills and best practices needed to start and grow successful tech businesses," explained UK-South Africa Tech Hub director Shirley Gilbey. "These businesses not only generate wealth for the founders, but also create a positive impact in communities and environments." A very wide range of sectors are covered by the programme -- just about any business that can use alternative technologies and contribute to the protection of the environment and the conservation of resources. Enterprises listed include eco-friendly beauty and/or cleaning products, eco-friendly fashion, farmers' markets, food plant nurseries and related operations, green app development, green blogs, furniture upcycling, herbal remedies, organic produce production and retailing, power generation, used bookstores, waste management, and water management (including water harvesting, filtration, treatment and metering). The three-month GreenTech programme is composed of ten modules, and will be delivered online, concluding with a virtual graduation ceremony. It will cover the fundamental elements required to create and grow a GreenTech business, and involves the participation of guests experts. The closing date for applications is January 25 and the programme, which is a pilot programme, starts on February 8.