The UK Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) lifted the grounding order on the Boeing 737 MAX airliner on Wednesday, only hours after the European Union (EU) Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) had done so. This meant that all the major Western civil aviation regulatory authorities (Brazil, Canada, the EU, UK and US) were now allowing the aircraft to return to commercial service, provided it was subjected to a number of software, technical, maintenance and training modifications. The UK CAA was one of the first major regulators to ground the 737 MAX in 2019 (being followed only a few hours later by EASA). Only one UK carrier, TUI, operated the 737 MAX and it had six of the single-aisle airliners on the UK registry. However, many non-UK airlines flew the 737 MAX into and across the UK. They would now be able to resume these flights, provided they met the UK CAA’s requirements. “Our thoughts remain with those affected by the tragic accidents of the Boeing 737 MAX,” assured UK CAA CE Richard Moriarty. “This is not a decision we have taken lightly and we would not have allowed a return to service for UK operators, or lifted the ban on the aircraft operating in UK airspace, unless we were satisfied that the aircraft type is airworthy and can be operated safely. The international work to return the Boeing 737 MAX to the skies has been the most extensive project of this kind ever undertaken in civil aviation and shows how important the cooperation between states and regulators is to maintaining safety.” The UK CAA made use of detailed information from EASA, the US Federal Aviation Administration and Boeing in reaching its decision to lift the grounding of the 737 MAX. In particular, the British agency worked with EASA (the UK CAA was a member of EASA until 23h00 London time on December 31, 2020, when Britain’s departure from the EU came into full force). EASA served as the UK’s technical agent regarding the 737 MAX and, being the UK’s validating authority, the CAA reviewed its work. The UK CAA had full view of all EASA’s technical assurance activities regarding the Boeing airliner. The British also took part in simulator evaluations and the forums on pilot training. The UK CAA was working closely with TUI regarding the return of its aircraft to service. The authority would have complete oversight of the carrier’s activities in restoring its 737 MAXs to commercial operations. This would include the implementation of the required modifications and training programmes for the pilots. TUI operated both scheduled and charter flights and was reportedly the largest charter airline in the world, in terms of passengers carried.