JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – So far, only about 600 000 t to 700 000 t of South African coal have moved to China, an untraditional market. This all comes against the background of China no longer buying coal from Australia. Although more South African coal sales to China are expected “for sure”, the top trader who forecast this to Mining Weekly sees the sales to China largely as an irrelevant rearranging of the deckchairs of the seaborne coal market, against the far bigger picture of the coal demand uptick being poised to considerably outstrip supply. At this stage, the sales of South African coal into to China pale into insignificance when compared with the 40-million tonnes exported into India every year, a market Australia will likely now target. The main beneficiaries of China’s ban on coal from Australia have so far been first Indonesia, given its proximity and favourable sailing time, followed by Russia and then South Africa. Exports of thermal coal to China were worth $4-billion to Australia in 2019 – and the combined export revenue received by Australia from China for both thermal coal and metallurgical coal in that year totalled $13.7-billion. Among the main reasons why South Africa has not been a traditional supplier of coal to China up to now, according to the trader, are freight differentials, which have priced it out, as well as South African coal qualities being very well liked elsewhere, for instance by the sponge-iron producers of India. South Africa is currently not short of markets into which its coal can be sold and appears now to entering a phase of being able to choose the best paying markets, of which China is likely to be one. China’s power plants have been permitted to import coal from several countries without clearance restrictions, The Global Times of China has reported, which has already resulted in 2021 starting on a bullish note for South African coal. Pro-coal commentators are reiterating that while new coal-fired power stations continue to be built in South East Asia, investment in new coal mines is not happening, which has resulted in a supply deficit for especially higher calorific value, lower sulphur, better quality coal. While this should have manifested itself last year, Covid-19 disguised this by eliminating demand for, in round numbers, an estimated 150-million tonne of coal in a billion tonne market and probably only impacted a 100-million tonnes of production. Coal production was not impacted in the same way as iron-ore was in, for example, Brazil. This resulted in an overhang of coal in 2020 and prices fell. Although the coronavirus is persisting, economies are restarting, especially in China, and a fundamental, physical supply deficit has emerged. In past years, when there was no renewable energy and natural gas to call on and physical demand deficits arose, the major mining companies would respond by opening up new coal mines. But with the majors exiting coal and running down existing coal mines, new mine announcements are now longer being made, which is resulting in rising prices and widening margins for those still in the coal business. Although it is widely assumed that China has adequate long-term supplies of coal, the country is continuing to need to import coal, as does India. Those still in coal are thus expected to generate strong free cash flows, while spending no expansionary capital and low sustaining capital. As there are also fewer coal analysts, financial institutions are in some cases adopting a metal analysis approach to coal without distinguishing between different qualities of coal from different countries, and the restrictions placed by countries on trace elements in coal.