Novatech, trading as Hesper Engineering, a ship repair and general engineering company based in Cape Town, has purchased a 51% shareholding in Swift Engineering. Swift Engineering, now trading as SwiftNova Engineering, is a specialised fabrication company servicing the marine, energy and oil and gas sectors in the Mossel Bay area, as well as nationally. The acquisition is set to strengthen the capabilities of Sturrock Grindrod Maritime’s (SGM’s) technical division, which comprises Hesper Engineering, NovaMarine and United Container Depots. “The relationship between Hesper Engineering and SwiftNova goes back many years,” says SGM technical CEO Marcus Twine. “Discussions regarding a potential partnership started at the beginning of 2020. We were open to it because we are always on the lookout for complementary opportunities to grow our business and footprint with partners that uphold similar values. “Director Danie Otto and his team have built a solid reputation and are established and respected in the construction community. They are known for delivering quality products with a high level of proficiency. I am confident that this partnership will be mutually beneficial.” When SGM and Novagroup joined forces in 2018, Sturrock Grindrod Maritime CEO Andrew Sturrock stated that the intention was to strengthen the companies’ position in the niche technical market. “With the addition of SwiftNova, we are excited to see how we can leverage off their respective sales and service agreements and, ultimately, offer one-stop technical solutions to our clients,” he says about the new acquisition. “SwiftNova’s expertise lies in steelwork, pipe fabrication, corrosion protection, design and diverse projects, which sits in the same service pool as Hesper Engineering – the partnership just makes sense.” SwiftNova was established in 1982. The company decided to seize the opportunities around the development of the Mossel Bay oilfields. The company’s clientele includes State-owned entities such as PetroSA, oil majors Shell, Total, Astron Energy, Engen, as well as internationally renowned shipping companies. “The partnership with Hesper Engineering and the changing of our name to SwiftNova Engineering signifies a new era for the company,” says Otto. “Nova in Latin means new and I am excited to see what the future holds. I appreciate the support we have received thus far from Hesper Engineering and the SGM Group.”