The Lesotho government has banned passenger flights to and from Maseru’s Moshoeshoe I International Airport with effect from Thursday (January 14). This was announced on Wednesday and, as a consequence, South African airline Airlink has had to suspend its daily service between Johannesburg and Maseru. The order by the Lesotho government came into effect at midnight Wednesday/Thursday and will remain in force until January 27. It is intended to contain the spread of Covid-19. “We regret, but respect the decision to temporarily halt passenger flights to Maseru’s Moshoeshoe I International Airport, which is Lesotho’s primary air transport gateway and we apologise to our customers for the inconvenience and disruption to their business that this will cause,” stated Airlink MD and CEO Rodger Foster. The flights affected by Lesotho’s decision are 4Z052 (Johannesburg-Maseru) and 4Z053 (Maseru-Johannesburg). Airlink customers should consult the airline’s website or their travel agents regarding refunds and changes in bookings. “The well-being of our customers, crew and staff is our priority,” he stressed. “Although we are required to suspend our Maseru flight, we continue to operate all of our other flights to destinations throughout Southern Africa and within South Africa.” Airlink continues to serve destinations in Botswana, the Democratic Republic of Congo, eSwatini, Mozambique, Namibia, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe, as well as many destinations within South Africa. To conform with South African curfew rules, all Airlink flights depart after 08h00 and arrive at their final destinations before 20h00. “By diligently applying and adhering to stringent biosecurity protocols, we have demonstrated that flying is the safest way to travel and that we can continue to support and enable business, tourism and trade without spreading the coronavirus,” he highlighted. “Airlink is looking forward to re-establishing the vital connections that sustain the all-important trade, business, tourism and family ties between the Mountain Kingdom and its neighbour.”