US-based global major aerospace group Boeing marked the advent of the new year with the delivery of three 777 Freighter (777F) aircraft to Qatar Airways Cargo. One of the aircraft concerned was the 200th 777F to be delivered. With this delivery, Qatar’s 777F fleet now numbers 24 aircraft. The airline also operates two Boeing 747-8F cargo aircraft. “With the arrival of these new freighters, we are injecting more capacity in the market which is very much required during the pandemic,” highlighted Qatar Airways Group CE Akbar Al Baker. “The added capacity will also enable us to support the logistics around the Covid-19 vaccination, which is projected to be one of the greatest logistical challenges for the industry. With our investments in innovation and fleet, we are able to fulfil our customers’ logistical requirements and facilitate the continuity of global trade.” Operating from its hub in Doha, the airline’s fleet of dedicated freighter aircraft serves more than 60 air cargo destinations around the world. Qatar Airways also flies freight in the belly-holds of its passenger aircraft to many destinations worldwide. “During these challenging times, Qatar Airways Cargo has been transporting humanitarian relief and medical goods to those in need, and we are proud that their growing fleet of 777 Freighters is supporting such a commendable effort,” emphasised Boeing senior VP: commercial sales and marketing Ihssane Mounir. “We deeply appreciate our long-standing partnership with Qatar Airways and their confidence in the 777 Freighters as the backbone of their expansive global air cargo operations.” The 777F has a range of 9 200 km and can carry a payload of 102 010 kg. This long range means that few, if any, refuelling stops are required by the aircraft. This, in turn, reduces operating costs by minimising landing fees and cargo handling costs, while also improving delivery times. Fewer stops also reduces delays imposed by airport congestion. Boeing is the market leader regarding freighter aircraft. The company has supplied more than 90% of the dedicated air cargo capacity, worldwide, in the form of both new-build freighter aircraft and airliners converted into freighter aircraft. The 777F is now the company’s best-selling freighter, with 242 ordered since it was launched in 2005. The record year for 777F orders so far was 2018, when 45 were ordered.