Bombardier Transportation says the Gautrain commuter fleet has successfully completed 40-million kilometres in service since operations began in 2010. This is the equivalent of close to a million trips around the equator. Bombardier delivered the intercity rapid rail link as a turnkey system, with a fleet of 24 four-car Electrostar trains (96 vehicles), the majority of which were assembled in South Africa. The company also provided the Cityflo 250 train control system that provides travel for passengers at speeds of up to 160 km/h. Bombardier has a contract for the maintenance of the system until 2026 and continues to work with its partners on this project. “This is one of the most visionary projects that we have ever been involved in in Africa. Gautrain sets a new global benchmark for an innovative rail system that benefits local communities and people,” says Bombardier Transportation South Africa MD Makgola Makololo. “As Africa’s first world-class, modern rapid rail service, as well as being the first semi-high-speed train on the continent, the Gautrain has made a positive impact in the lives of millions of Gauteng residents. “We are proud of our highly reliable commuter fleet having completed around 900 000 trips on the Gautrain network.” “This achievement is thanks to the close collaboration between Bombardier, Gautrain Management Agency, Bombela Concession Company and Bombela Operating Company, in successfully delivering and maintaining this project and creating thousands of direct and indirect local jobs during this exciting journey,” she adds. “Rail transport in Gauteng entered a new era with the Gautrain rapid rail link and we are proud to have provided a safe, efficient and reliable service to more than 125-million commuters and airport travellers since 2010.” The Gautrain is an 80-km commuter rail system in Gauteng, linking Johannesburg, Pretoria, Ekurhuleni and the OR Tambo International Airport. Bombardier employs around 125 local staff on the Gautrain project operating out of the maintenance facility in Midrand.