End-to-end supply chain logistics multinational DP World and United Nations humanitarian and developmental aid organisation Unicef have announced a partnership to support the global distribution of Covid-19 vaccines and related immunisation supplies in low- and lower-middle-income countries, DP World said in a January 29 statement. Additionally, DP World has committed to leveraging its global logistics infrastructure and services on a pro-bono basis in support of Covid-19 vaccine logistics needs, including transport, port and storage requirements in countries where DP World is present. "Distributing Covid-19 vaccines is humanity's biggest logistics challenge since the end of the Second World War. We offer our infrastructure and expertise to support this effort because everyone should have access to vaccines, especially the most vulnerable in our society. Unless the vaccine is available to all, the pandemic will not end for anyone," said chairperson and CEO Sultan Ahmed bin Sulayem. The new partnership, with a multimillion-dollar value, is the largest to date to support Unicef's lead role in procuring and supplying two-billion doses of Covid-19 vaccines and auxiliary vaccination supplies on behalf of the global vaccine development and access organisation Covax facility. DP World will provide Unicef with logistics solutions and supply-chain expertise. By using DP World's warehouse facilities in Dubai, Unicef will have optimised access to many countries. DP World and Unicef will also collaborate on other global programmes in support of education, health, women's empowerment and water and sanitation, the company announced. Dubai is currently used by Unicef as a strategic hub for pre-positioning auxiliary materials needed for the Covid-19 vaccine campaigns, such as syringes and safety boxes. "The pandemic has turned children's worlds upside down, disrupting their education, health and protection. Vaccines will be a big step towards putting children's lives back on track. This new partnership will support our collective efforts to ensure equitable, affordable and sustainable access to Covid-19 vaccines," said  Unicef executive director Henrietta Fore. Under this partnership, DP World and Unicef will also collaborate to address logistical bottlenecks hindering children and their families' access to essential supplies through advocacy and sharing of knowledge and expertise. The partnership was signed by Fore and Bin Sulayem. It arose from Unicef's collaboration with the World Economic Forum's Supply Chain and Transport Community - of which DP World is a member - that explores how the community collectively could support an equitable access to the Covid-19 vaccines globally.