A floating regasification unit (FRU) for the Tema port’s liquid natural gas (LNG) facility, in Ghana, arrived on January 7. This will enable Tema LNG Terminal Company (TLTC) to start delivering LNG to customers in the first quarter of the year. The purpose-built FRU, which was built by Jiangnan Shipbuilding, a subsidiary of China State Shipbuilding Corporation, left the Jiangnan shipyard at the end of November. The FRU will be located within the Tema port, where TLTC has built additional marine infrastructure that will facilitate cost-efficient LNG loading and regasification without affecting maritime and port traffic in the Gulf of Guinea. The Tema LNG terminal, backed by Helios Investment Partners and Africa Infrastructure Investment Managers, is the first offshore LNG-receiving terminal in sub-Saharan Africa. The terminal will employ the innovative combination of the FRU twinned with an existing LNG carrier to receive, store and regasify LNG. This system provides Ghana with all the functionality of a large-scale FRU terminal, but with added flexibility, enabling it to respond to rapidly increasing domestic gas demand with a cleaner and more affordable energy solution. TLTC project manager Edmund Agyeman-Duah says the Tema LNG terminal aims to meet Ghana’s growing energy demand through an innovative yet cost-efficient, reliable supply. “Once operational, this FRU will enable the Tema LNG facility to receive, regasify, store and deliver roughly 1.7-million tonnes of LNG a year – 30% of Ghana’s general capacity.” He adds that Tema LNG’s year-round supply of gas will enable the Ghana National Petroleum Corporation (GNPC) to supply reliable and cost-effective gas into the Tema power and industrial enclave, while strengthening West Africa’s energy security. Helios Investment Partners representative Ogbemi Ofuya says the terminal project supports Ghana’s ambitions to continue on its trajectory as one of the fastest growing economies in Africa, by delivering the energy infrastructure to support accelerated industrialisation. “As evidenced in similar fast growing economies in Asia and Latin America, the introduction of LNG into the energy mix serves as a catalyst for industrial and economic growth.” He adds that the year-round, guaranteed supply of LNG and piped gas through the Tema LNG terminal facilitates forward planning and investments in receiving infrastructure by power plants, mines and industries across the West Africa region who are currently reliant on more expensive liquid fuels. “The switch to gas also delivers a significant environmental benefit and supports the transition to cleaner burning fuels in the region by reducing carbon dioxide emissions and eliminating sulphur emissions, in line with the Paris Climate Accord objectives.” LNG will be supplied under a long-term contract with Shell. The onshore reception facilities will receive the gas from the FRU through subsea pipelines, before delivering natural gas to the GNPC and its customers. TLTC awarded Spanish firm Reganosa Servicios SL the contract for the operation and maintenance of the FRU, floating storage units and the associated 6 km gas pipeline linking the terminal to the existing pipeline network.