A new food processing method developed by biotechnology multinational Green Cell Technologies (GCT) deploys a non-thermal, non-chemical process to open 99.999998% of all cell structures using its Dynamic Cellular Disruption (DCD) process and disruptor technology. During the DCD process, other than pipe loss, which is the same volume irrespective of the production size, there is no waste product and the plant material is used in its entirety. DCD renders all the molecules bio-available for a body to use. DCD extracts from the source material and, therefore, outcomes are wholly reliant on the source material itself, the company states. Current food and beverage processing methods often kill off molecules that provide nutrition by using incorrect heat, generating oxidative stress or enzyme action, thereby removing their efficacy. Additionally, these existing methods cannot easily and effectively process skins and seeds (which contain significant nutritional properties), or radically reduce the fibre particle size to a level that will not upset the organoleptic sensibilities of the consumer, GCT says in a January 12 statement. Therefore, a conventional processor ends each day with not only a large pile of waste, but also a product that has a vastly reduced nutritional profile compared with the source material. "Ironically, the waste represents the majority of the raw material molecules that are required for optimal nutrition. The waste also represents most of the fibre, which if ingested, would aid other nutritional and health benefits." Molecules found in cellular structures of meat, fruit, vegetables, berries, nuts, and seeds provide sustaining nutrition to achieve good health and wellbeing. These molecules represent a comprehensive variety of all the macro- and micronutrients necessary for human beings and animals to flourish. Headquartered in the Isle of Man, GCT used its South African-based test facility to develop and manufacture a butternut soup, which was then sent for measurement at accredited laboratories to prove its efficacy and appropriateness for feeding schemes, as well as commercial manufacture. "GCT manufactured the soup using the DCD process and disruptor technology and GCT has now substantially proven that it is able to produce healthy and tasty food that does not cost the earth," the company states. The DCD also reduces microbiological contaminants, yeasts and moulds found in source materials. Therefore, the product that has passed through the disruptor will show improved microbiological cleanliness. "The DCD process and disruptor technology increase the available nutrition per serving, and reduce particle size and waste, which has a positive impact on the consumer and the environment. The increased extraction of molecules signifies an increase in yield, and, with the use of what would normally be considered waste, has a positive economic impact on the processing value chain. The technology can process most raw materials to improve nutrition while reducing food insecurity," the company says.