The UK Space Agency announced on Wednesday that it was providing funding to a project led by the University of Edinburgh in Scotland to aid farmers in Malawi through the development of land-classification maps, using satellite data. These maps would cover high potential agricultural areas, and permit the effective planning of large-scale agricultural projects in the African country. The funding is being provided under the UK’s Space Research and Innovation Network for Technology programme. According to Scottish news reports, the funding being provided for the Malawi project is £200 000. “This UK government funded project is an example of how space innovation can solve important global problems and improve lives,” affirmed UK Minister for Scotland Iain Steward. “The Scottish researchers are playing a key role in helping Malawian farmers plan for large-scale agriculture projects by developing land-use maps.” In this project, the University of Edinburgh’s School of Geosciences is partnering with two startup companies, Trade in Space and Geospace Agricultural. (The latter is a Scottish company, not to be confused with South African enterprise GeoSpace International.) “Sprint and the UK Space Agency have given us a fantastic opportunity to create the tools to achieve real positive impact on sustainable agricultural productivity in Malawi,” Trade in Space head Robin Sampson told The Herald newspaper. “We’re also excited to have the opportunity to continue to work with strategic partners Geospace Agricultural and the School of Geosciences at the University of Edinburgh.” The aim is to facilitate the development of large-scale agriculture in Malawi, following the model pioneered by UK group Jacoma Estates. Jacoma does not focus merely on its own properties, but works with the surrounding smallholder farmers. It signs contracts with them, guaranteeing the smallholders minimum prices and market access for their products. It is also working to provide these smallholders with quality seeds, irrigation and pest control skills. Currently, more than 5 200 independent smallholder farmers are part of the Jacoma network.