Temporary energy market company Aggreko has announced its ambition to achieve net zero emissions by 2050 or sooner, aligning with the Paris Agreement to limit global warming to 1.5 °C. Aggreko has also committed to offering cleaner technologies and fuels to support its customers through their energy transition – using flexible and competitive energy solutions to meet their environmental sustainability targets. By 2030, Aggreko plans to reduce the amount of fossil diesel fuel used in customer solutions by at least 50% by offering customers cleaner technologies and fuels that guarantee the same or better levels of reliability and competitiveness. Moreover, it plans to reduce the local air quality emissions of their solutions also by 50% (all emissions from diesel, gas and other fuels); and achieve net zero across all its own business operations. By 2050 or sooner, Aggreko intends to be a net zero business, across all the services it provides. To achieve its 2030 and 2050 ambitions, Aggreko will accelerate investment in lower-carbon technologies and will continue to shift its global generator fleet towards more gas and greener drop-in liquid fuels. Aggreko will also invest in other clean energy alternatives such as e-fuels, hydrogen-ready engines and fuel cells, in preparation for rapid exploitation as the technology becomes available at scale, whilst also closely monitoring and investigating future technologies. Aggreko will accelerate its offering of more efficient solutions notably through temperature control, energy recovery and co- or tri-generation. Simultaneously, Aggreko will continue to grow its portfolio of mobile and modular solar power and battery storage assets, which, when combined with its generator fleet, help customers to successfully reduce their carbon emissions and costs, the company said. Aggreko will continue to enhance the use of connected systems, remote monitoring and data analytics to increase efficiency and track performance against its own and its customers’ emissions reduction targets.