Mercedes-Benz South Africa (MBSA) and local electronic sports (e-sports) company ATK has announced the first-ever motorsport partnership to encompass e-sports teams, events and gaming spaces in the country. MBSA will be the first motorsport sponsor for a South African e-sports team, entering the arena as a sponsor for the ATK League of Legends and Sim Racing teams. The local arm of the German car maker will also be an official sponsor of the ATK Arena gaming space in Cape Town. MBSA will also joined ATK in hosting one of the biggest Sim Racing series in Southern Africa, titled the Mercedes-Benz ATK Pro Series, launched this week. The series invites top sim racers from around the country to battle for the title of South Africa's best sim racer. The winner will get the opportunity to represent South Africa at the FIA Motorsport Games in October. The Mercedes-Benz ATK Pro Series will invite drivers to race in a series of GT3 cars, guided by a Mercedes-Benz GT4 pace vehicle. ATK CEO Warren Barkhuizen says ​the partnership between MBSA and ATK represents a significant milestone for the South African gaming community and e-sports in its entirety. “We could not have hoped for a better partner to bring e-sports to a wider audience, whilst boosting the overall profile of gaming in South Africa and beyond. “Having begun sponsored e-sports events such as ESL One since 2017, we are thrilled to announce a three-year partnership with MBSA and will be proudly bearing the three-pointed star alongside as primary sponsor for select ATK e-sport teams, venues and events.” MBSA says it recognises the potential of the e-sports market. "We are pleased by the digital generation’s interest in professional gaming and the new forms of media consumption and communication within the gaming community,” says Mercedes-Benz Cars South Africa marketing director Selvin Govender. “After several years of involvement in various e-sports initiatives, we have now decided to systematically take the next step. “With this partnership, Mercedes-Benz and ATK will push the boundaries between the virtual and reality, showcasing the latest in innovation in a bid to challenge the way we once thought about performance and gaming.”