Hensoldt South Africa (Hensoldt SA), the local subsidiary of the Germany-based Hensoldt group, has launched a new radar business. This step followed the company’s acquisition of the defence and security and air traffic management (ATM) business units of another South African company, Tellumat, at the end of last year. These businesses were then integrated with Hensoldt SA’s own radar and other technological capabilities to form its new Radar Business Unit. “With the integration of the Tellumat Defence & Security and ATM business units into Hensoldt South Africa, we are now representing the three major sensor solution business lines of the Hensoldt group here in South Africa,” highlighted Hensoldt SA MD Rynier van der Watt. “Expanding from Optronics and Spectrum Dominance [electronic and cyber warfare and intelligence technologies] to now also include radar, identification friend or foe (IFF) and datalinks therefore creating a complete sensor solutions offering.” “Launching the Radar Business Unit of Hensoldt South Africa is a strategic expansion of Hensoldt’s radar business with the goal to become the leading manufacturer and exporter of air-surveillance and defence radars on the African continent,” affirmed Radar Business Unit CEO Bennie Langenhoven. Regarding IFF and datalinks, Hensoldt SA has taken over a world-quality range of products which it intended to develop ever further. As for radar, this segment covered both terrestrial and naval systems. The new business would continue to provide maintenance, repair and overhaul services for existing radars, including those produced by other original-equipment manufacturers as well as by the Hensoldt group itself. It would also offer upgrades to existing radar systems. In addition Hensoldt SA was developing a new range of next-generation air defence radar systems. “This development marks the first time that a new Hensoldt tactical air defence radar for land and sea is developed outside Germany,” stressed Hensoldt Radar Division head Erwin Paulus. “The opening of the Hensoldt Radar Business Unit in South Africa is of high strategic importance to continue our efforts to further internationalise the Hensoldt Radar Business.” “[T]he Radar Business Unit will also become the custodian of the Hensoldt South Africa engineering hub, where we will be incubating new radar products to support the Hensoldt group,” stated Van der Watt. This would support the company’s objective of being a leader in the promotion of innovation and the development of capability and expertise in the South African defence and aerospace industry. Hensoldt SA now operated five sites with more than 700 employees, and was the Hensoldt group’s biggest industrial operation outside of Europe.