JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – The copper strength of Orion Minerals is intensifying with Tuesday’s announcement of the company’s exclusive option to acquire the Okiep Copper Complex in South Africa’s Northern Cape for A$7.5-million. The Sydney- and Johannesburg-listed company, headed by Errol Smart, now has an opportunity to develop a second base metal production hub alongside its well-endowed first – the Prieska copper/zinc project. The combination of the Okiep Copper Complex and Prieska is seen by Orion Minerals as having the potential to transform it into a base metals powerhouse. The Okiep Copper Complex has an historical production of more than two-million tons of copper and it is seen as having outstanding exploration upside, particularly with the use of new technology. In a presentation to investors and media, Smart drew attention to its similarity to Orion’s well-infrastructured and data-rich Prieska project, 450 km east of it. The area is also close to Vedanta’s mines, mining services and contractors, as well as serviced mining towns. The Okiep Copper Complex’s mineral interests are held by three entities Orion has an option agreement to acquire. These are 56.25% of South African Tantalum Mining (SAFTA). The remaining 43.75% is held by South Africa’s State-owned Industrial Development Corporation (IDC), which remains an active supporter and SAFTA financier. Orion and the IDC would cooperate to ensure compliance with the Mining Charter. The other two entities, of which 100% is targeted in each case, are Nababeeb Copper (NCC) and Bulletrap Copper (BCC). Within 12 months of closing the proposed transaction, Orion is committed to spending a minimum of R4-million on exploration in each of the SAFTA, NCC and BCC areas. These entities hold the majority of the large historical mines within the Okiep Copper Complex, for which there is technical data for 26 000 surface and underground drill holes and 150 000 technical reports, as well as several drilled orebodies with decline mine access and services are already in place. All this is seen as potentially opening the way for production to commence in the next 18 months to 24 months, to supplement Prieska’s production and expand Orion’s base metals mining operations in the Northern Cape. Ownership changes from Newmont to Gold Fields and Metorex, extending from the 1960s to 2019, have coincided with the ups and downs of the copper price cycles. SAFTA has applied for a mining right on Metorex’s last producing section, where production stopes at 150 m below surface remain open. Between 1939 and 1993, 19 new deposits were discovered and mined, with regional exploration ceasing in 1993. The transaction is seen by Orion as being a significant growth opportunity in a top-tier mining district, with a clear pathway to establishing the Northern Cape’s second base metals production hub – another smart move by Smart.