Domestic appliance manufacturer Defy on February 11 launched its latest innovation, the Solar Hybrid fridge and freezer products, during a virtual event. The product range includes a fridge and a chest freezer, both of which use solar and grid power. The appliances run directly off the solar panels when the sun is out and revert to the electrical grid at night when it is dark. “Traditionally, solar refrigerators are high-cost items and require expensive batteries or inverters. However, the Solar Hybrid range provides a built-in intelligent electronics solution aimed at providing this innovative technology to a wider market at an affordable price to help save on electricity costs. "This while, at the same time, making it easier for more people to live a greener life by increasing sustainable solar power use,” says Defy Appliances CEO Evren Albas. The appliances were designed with Africa in mind, help to lower consumers' energy costs by up to 44% and are able to keep food frozen for up to 49 hours when there is no power, such as when there is load-shedding − a regular occurrence in South Africa. Owing to the technology used, the total cost of ownership is reduced. This is enabled by removing the requirement for separate battery and inverter purchases, to have a solar appliance at home with built-in smart electronics installed in these new appliances. These features have been implemented to position the products for everyday life in homes, to reduce rising electricity costs, while keeping food fresh during load-shedding. Defy celebrated it 115th year in South Africa in 2020. “It is in celebration of this long history that we reaffirm our commitment to South Africa, and the African continent, by launching this first-of-its-kind range of solar hybrid appliances designed to improve the daily lives of South Africans,” comments Albas. Speaking at the launch event, Defy partner Greendesign CEO and founder Vere Shaba says engineering has the potential to solve some of the greatest challenges facing the continent. “Appliances like these show that climate and social innovation is possible in our homes. Not only possible, but important if we are going to address the challenges of energy equity, energy security, energy sustainability and climate change as Africans,” she notes. Moreover, she states that this is an important stride in advancing innovation on the continent. “The rising cost of electricity, coupled with lengthy disruptions in power supply . . . are affecting everyone in Africa. It is these challenges that inspired us to democratise the cost of solar products to make this innovation available to more communities,” says Alba. The Defy Solar Hybrid product range retails for below R6 000 and will be available in 78 stores at the end of February. It will be rolled out to more stores in due course. The installation process is managed by Defy’s partner, which specialises in solar installations, and has a countrywide footprint.