Business Unity South Africa (Busa) has appealed to President Cyril Ramaphosa to act decisively against former President Jacob Zuma by ensuring that the law takes its course in the matter of Zuma appearing before the Zondo Commission, or face exacerbated investor anxieties which will worsen the economic conditions for the exasperated population of South Africa. The Jacob Zuma Foundation released a statement on Monday saying Zuma will defy a Constitutional Court order which requested him to abide by a summons to appear before the commission. Busa president Sipho Pityana said it was clear that South African laws were politicised, even in the highest court, and warned when a former President defies a ruling from the Constitutional Court the country’s constitutional democracy and rule of law were under threat. He said Busa had consistently highlighted the need to create an environment for investment and growth in South Africa, but stated that government had yet to make the necessary structural interventions to create such an environment. He noted that Zuma’s conduct worsens an already difficult investment climate, and again warned that if South Africa failed to act against the court violation, investors would see the country as having neither the political or economic environment for investment. Busa also called on the African National Congress to act against Zuma to instil confidence in South Africans and to demonstrate that the party respects the Constitution and insists that the party’s members abide by the rulings of the Constitutional Court. Meanwhile, Freedom Under Law CEO Nicole Fritz reiterated Busa’s call for the law to take its course against Zuma, saying his conduct has been in “calculated defiance” of the law. “If he persists in his refusal to respond to the mass of allegations, we look forward to the law taking its course. The Constitutional Court has now made it clear that the time for this ducking and diving is over. Instead of complying with its simple instruction, Zuma has now resorted to his well-worn defence of victimhood wrapped in populism,” noted Fritz. She called out Zuma for comparing the court calling for him to appear to testify at the commission to Robert Sobukwe’s persecution under apartheid.