Security and medical response platform Aura has launched a WhatsApp security chatbot in partnership with stolen vehicle recovery specialist Tracker. Powered by Aura, the Tracker CareGuard service promises rapid mobile emergency response anywhere, anytime within South Africa. The solution enables subscribers to request immediate mobile armed response assistance wherever they are, by sharing a location pin in WhatsApp. Aura CEO and founder Warren Myers says the service illustrates the power of technology in preventing and combating crime, and the role it plays in enabling South African businesses to offer innovative security products and services to customers. “The Tracker CareGuard service is another important step towards increasing the accessibility of crucial emergency services in South Africa where the vast majority of people are unable to afford the benefits of private security.” Myers says Aura’s aim has always been to deploy technology to create a more inclusive security landscape. “WhatsApp is used by over two-billion people in over 180 countries. With such widespread popularity and reach in South Africa, it is the most coherent delivery tool to put private security in the hands of those who need it at an affordable price point. Such a tool is not only easy to use, but is easily shareable too, making it a quick and responsive means of fighting crime.” The WhatsApp security chatbot connects to Aura’s nationwide network of more than 1 500 armed responders. By making use of artificial intelligence and machine learning to streamline its system, the Aura-backed Tracker CareGuard solution ensures that the closest responders are dispatched to a distress call, explains Myers. “Security technologies which enable broad access and the migration from static manned guards toward technology-based detection, linked to fast human responses, have the potential to make the biggest impact in eradicating crime, both in South Africa and across the globe. “Our data-on-demand service uses statistical data to guide decision-making, which in turn assists private security companies to become more affordable, accessible and effective,” says Myers.