The first Sustainable Energy for All (SEforAll) Youth Summit, held virtually by sustainable energy organisation SEforAll, concluded on February 11, with calls from participants for progress on clean energy and sustainable development. Further, a new SEforAll ‘Be Bold’ campaign will be launched in March to promote more ambitious progress on United Nations (UN) Sustainable Development Goal 7 (SDG 7), which aims to support access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all by 2030. SEforAll works in partnership with the UN and leaders in government, the private sector, financial institutions, civil society and philanthropies to drive faster action towards the achievement of SDG 7, in line with the Paris Agreement on climate change. The outcomes of the three-day summit will feed directly into key SEforAll-led events in 2021 to drive more ambitious action towards universal energy access, including the UN High-Level Dialogue on Energy in September and the Conference of the Parties 26 to be held in November. This includes a set of recommendations outlining how to place a clean energy transition at the heart of the youth climate action movement developed during the SDG 7 Youth Roundtable session with the UN Secretary-General Envoy on Youth Jayathma Wickramanayake. SEforAll CEO and special representative of the UN Secretary-General for Sustainable Energy for All and UN Energy co-chairperson Damilola Ogunbiyi called for young people to be bolder in their actions to secure a clean energy transition that leaves no one behind. “As the largest youth generation in history, these young energy leaders are our future. That is why I strongly believe engaging youth in the energy transition is not just desirable, but essential. We must maximise their innovations, passion and commitment to help create change to meet global climate and energy goals.” "It is unacceptable for governments to continue to build polluting economies of the past by investing in fossil fuels. Young people understand the links between sustainable development and climate justice. Youth have risen to the forefront as advocates and innovators in bringing sustainable energy solutions to homes, communities and countries," said UN Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed in an opening address.