Suzuki Auto South Africa (SASA) this week unveiled India’s most popular compact sports-utility vehicle (SUV) to the local market – the Vitara Brezza. The Vitara Brezza was first introduced in India in 2016, with an upgraded model that arrived last year. It has since become the most popular compact SUV in that country, accounting for 23% of segment sales and 11% of all SUV sales, across all categories. The Vitara Brezza is not to be confused with the Vitara. The lower-cost Brezza, aimed at the entry-level SUV market, will slot in above the Ignis and below the Vitara, which remains a more premium SUV offering with more space and more powerful engines. Since the addition of a petrol engine in 2020, the Brezza has gained appeal as an export model, says SASA, with the vehicle soon to be available in 18 countries outside India, with 12 of these in Africa. South Africa is the first country on the continent to receive the Brezza. SASA believes the Brezza fills a gap in its product offering that existed in the R244 900 to R309 900 price range. The Brezza is available in two specification levels, namely GL and GLX, and with a choice of manual or automatic transmission. The Brezza has the same wheelbase as the Vitara at 2 500 mm, but it is shorter (by 180 mm), wider (by 15 mm) and rides higher off the ground (198 mm vs 185 mm) than its sibling. A seven-inch touch screen infotainment system is standard across the range. The system is fitted with Apple CarPlay and Android Auto, and also displays images from the reverse camera. Bluetooth, an auxiliary input and a USB port are also standard, while all models allow the driver hands-free control of the phone interface by using steering wheel buttons or the voice command system. Also available as standard are automatic climate control, electric windows all-round, a height-adjustable driver’s seat, rear parking sensors, remote central locking and a rear armrest with cup holders. In the GLX model, the steering wheel is leather clad and there are additional interior lights in the foot well, glove box and the luggage compartment. The GLX model also adds a centre armrest for the front occupants and a push-button starter. In addition, the top of the two glove boxes are air conditioned, allowing the occupants to cool their drinks and snacks while driving. Other GLX-only luxuries include height adjustable front seatbelts, an auto-dimming rear mirror, auto-folding side mirrors, automatic rain-sensing windshield wipers, a 12 V port in the luggage area and additional tweeters for more immersive sound from the infotainment system. All Brezza models have the same safety features. Active safety systems include antilock brakes with emergency brake-force distribution and brake-assistance, airbags for the driver and front passenger, pre-tensioners and force limiters on all seatbelts, and Isofix-mountings for child seats. All models also have a high-mounted stop lamp, a rear window-demister and a rear wiper with integrated washer as standard. The Vitara Brezza range is fitted with the same engine that can be found in the  Jimny, Ertiga and Ciaz. In the Brezza, the K15B-engine is engineered to deliver 77 kW of power at 6 000 rpm and 138 Nm of torque at 4 400 rpm. The Suzuki Vitara Brezza is sold with a 4-year/60 000 km service plan and a 5-year/200 000 km mechanical warranty. Pricing starts at R244 900. Competitors include the Ford EcoSport and Hyundai Venue. SASA believes, however, that the Brezza has a price advantage of between 12% and 15% on these models.