The South African German Energy Programme (Sagen), implemented by the German development agency Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) and the South African National Energy Development Institute (SANEDI), has launched a new application (app) to improve investment decisions around energy use in lighting of buildings across South Africa. The app has been tailored especially for the local market and will be made available for download later this year. On an individual item basis, a lightbulb may not be considered a major energy consuming product, especially in a home or small office. However, considered collectively, on a larger scale – such as in a government facility, school or hospital – the energy efficiency of lighting can have a significant impact on a building’s energy use. Streetlighting and outdoor area lighting also use a lot of energy which is necessary for a secure environment. However, managing area lighting is more difficult than indoor lighting, and as such, energy efficient lighting has an important role to play in reducing costs associated with this expense. It is with this in mind that the Tshwane University of Technology (TUT) was appointed by the GIZ to develop an app that helps users implement energy efficient lighting. The app was created in collaboration with SANEDI and the Department of Defence (DoD), and funded by the GIZ. The app has been designed with municipal and government buildings in mind as the primary target market; however, both GIZ and SANEDI hope to see uptake by the private sector, too. A team of five technologists at TUT were supported by relevant professors as they worked on the app throughout 2020. SANEDI renewable energy centre of research and development manager Dr Karen Surridge says, developed for both mobile and personal computer use, the app guides users through a lighting energy audit of a building. “As you work your way through a building and its grounds, you count the lights and note their specs, thus gathering data that you enter into the app. The app then provides information on alternative lighting solutions, their cost, energy usage, the investment required and, importantly, the return on that investment in terms of energy and costs saved.” The information gathered is housed securely on the SANEDI server, and users do not have access to other users’ data, according to app developers. GIZ energy efficiency head Marlett Balmer says the GIZ funded this project owing to the growing importance of energy efficiency. “It is estimated that replacing lighting systems with the latest light-emitting-diode technology could save between 30% and 60% of an organisation’s lighting bill.” She adds that investing in energy efficient lighting offers an immediately affordable intervention as a first step towards energy efficiency and sustainability with a direct monetary benefit. Balmer also explains that organisations find it challenging to calculate the replacement cost of existing lighting systems as well as the potential savings that could be realised with energy efficient lighting solutions. “The user-friendly tool assists in overcoming this challenge.” Effort was made to ensure the app provides the right suggestions based on correct and current technology and cost data. To this end, the app adapts its recommendations based on the user’s location, taking into account the price of lightbulbs in that area, as well as the relevant electricity tariff. The app has been tested in an extreme application, in collaboration with SANEDI partner, the DoD, with varied and unique lighting requirements. The team used the app to audit the lighting of a DoD facility near Pretoria, which has very specific lighting needs for security and surveillance. Initial auditing revealed that the base could save as much as R200 000 a year, with a return on investment of less than 12 months, should the base choose to implement all the app suggestions.