Europe-based major aerospace company Airbus has partnered with five French companies and agencies to launch a global ‘call for expressions of interest’ in opportunities presented by the adoption of hydrogen as a fuel source by aviation and airports. In addition to Airbus, the consortium is composed of airline group Air France-KLM, airports company Groupe ADP (previously, Aéroports de Paris), the Paris Region (somewhat akin to a South African province) and the Choose Paris Region investment promotion agency. The aim of the initiative, which is unprecedented, is to help decarbonise air transport. It is in line with France’s energy transition strategy and has the support of the European Commission. More specifically, it seeks to transform Paris airports into ‘hydrogen hubs’. The call will be open from February 11 to March 19. The hope is that it will help build an airport ecosystem that is unique, embracing hydrogen, laboratories, universities, startups, small and medium-sized enterprises and major corporations. “The support for research and development and the use of new energies is fundamental to move towards a more sustainable and responsible air transport,” highlighted Air France-KLM executive VP & corporate secretary Anne-Sophie Le Lay. “This call for expressions of interest brings together leading partners to lay the foundations of an innovative and ambitious ecosystem.” The call embraces three primary themes. First, and within an airport environment, the storage, transport and distribution of both liquid and gaseous hydrogen. Second, the diversification of applications for hydrogen at airports and in aeronautics more generally – including its use to power airport ground vehicles, buildings, and railway trains serving the airports. Third, the development of a hydrogen-based circular economy, including the recovery of surplus or byproduct hydrogen resulting from airport and aviation activities. “Airbus is determined to drive a bold vision for the future of sustainable aviation, and to lead the transition to zero-emission commercial flight,” affirmed Airbus executive VP engineering Jean-Brice Dumont. “Hydrogen is one of the most promising technologies that will help us meet that objective – but we won’t be able to do it alone. This revolution will also require our regulatory and infrastructure ecosystems to change worldwide. Airports have a key role to play in enabling that transition, starting (Thursday), and we hope that this open innovation initiative will foster the development of creative projects and solutions.”