President Cyril Ramaphosa has assured South Africans that the net is closing in on those involved in corrupt acts, warning those found guilty that they will be dealt with harshly and appropriately. Last week the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) released a report on public spending on coronavirus in South Africa, which found evidence of political pressure, price inflation, and fraud in many of the contracts, fuelled by an "insatiable pursuit of self-enrichment". Ramaphosa said the SIU’s investigation provided encouragement in that unlawful deeds were being uncovered and action was being taken against those who were responsible. “As a country that has become far too used to hearing stories about corruption, little could have prepared us for seeing, in detail, the lengths to which some among our people have gone to steal at a time when our nation is facing the worst health emergency in modern times. They will not get to enjoy their ill-gotten gains, as steps have been taken to recover stolen money, including the freezing of bank accounts,” Ramaphosa warned. He further revealed that some civil litigation cases have been instituted to recover money and other cases have been referred for prosecution. Unlawful contracts have been cancelled and government will not pay service providers under investigation pending an outcome. Government has also instituted disciplinary action against implicated officials. “Similar action is being taken against individuals and companies implicated in maladministration and fraud around the Covid-19 Temporary Employment Relief Scheme. This includes employers who pocketed the benefits owed to their staff, or kept quiet about TERS funds paid to them by mistake,” Ramaphosa said, adding that a number of hard lessons had been learned. He said loopholes in regulation, legislation and procedures must be closed and called for a coordinated approach by several organs of State to fight corruption. He again assured South Africans that those involved in corrupt acts, in private companies and in public service, would be caught. “Our nation’s experience in the procurement of essential supplies and services during the national state of disaster is a disgraceful chapter that must be firmly closed. This experience has shown that, as a State and as a society, we have both the will and the means to act decisively against theft, fraud and corruption,” Ramaphosa ended.