As the Covid-19 pandemic and resultant restrictions necessitate a move online for citizens and businesses, broadband is playing an essential role that should be embraced. With the emergence of new technologies, new advanced instruments and tools for online engagement, networking and businesses that are digitised means that, in the future, businesses are going to be heavily reliant on broadband access for reliable and fast Internet connection. “The Covid-19 pandemic has escalated the need for more small, medium-sized and microenterprises to embrace fast and reliable Internet connection for selling their products, engaging with customers, marketing and communicating with suppliers and this is where business broadband comes in,” said Telkom Business chief commercial officer Dumisani Bengu. While business broadband may be considered more costly than home broadband, its packages are often cost efficient and inexpensive when taking into account the value-add services for small, medium-sized and microenterprises. “This kind of broadband is packaged with tools and instruments that are tailored for each enterprise, including security features and various software packages that help protect companies' data against cyberattacks.” Further, compared with home broadband, business broadband offers higher speeds, creating stronger and reliable connectivity. Standard broadband, found in digital-subscriber lines and older dial-ups, has speeds up to 30 Mb/s, while super-fast broadband speed can go up to 300 Mb/s. “Ultra-fast fibre is the gold standard of broadband connectivity with speeds of more than 300 Mb/s and some industry players can go up to 1 Gb/s,” Bengu commented, noting that ultra-fast fibre should be considered by businesses in fields such as data science, digital ecosystems, e-commerce and others that have digitally distributed core products and value propositions. “As technology develops, there are a lot of solutions in other verticals, such as smart offices, distributed energy supply such as renewables, close circuit plant monitoring systems, [besides others] and it is only a matter of time before they proliferate the South African market and broadband speed is going to be a distinguishing factor.” Business broadband will play an important role in the future of business productivity, growth, customer service and customer experience. “Broadband is a crucial driver of job creation and economic growth. The applications enabled by the Internet are especially important for small businesses because they have become crucial platforms for innovation in healthcare, education, entrepreneurship and communications,” Bengu concluded.